Welcome to this course on mind
and reality. I'm Steve
Butterfill and I'll be your
lecturer for this course.
I haven’t taught this course before.
It's the first time for me,
so it's particularly
exciting. It's also
the first time that I've
taught an online lecture
course.
And weirdly enough, I'm
incredibly nervous.
So I'm going to dive
straight into it.
This is a
course about the notion of a
point of view. A point of view
on the world.
To illustrate, in the novel ‘The Lost
Memory of Skin‘,
Russell banks does something
extraordinary. He creates
empathy for homeless paedophile
called the kid.
How does he do that? He allows
you to understand the world or
something of it from the kids
point of view.
This is a feature of many novels
and of course plenty of fact
books to biographies, for
example. They allow you to
understand things from another,
perhaps quite alien POV.
Why am I even mentioning this
obvious truth? Well, you and I
each have a point of view.
And having a point of view is a
fundamental part of having a
mind like mine or yours. So
thinking about points of view on
the world seems to me like a
good place to start in a course
called mind and reality.
So point of view, very simple.
There are some things which
are presented to you in a
certain way. Having a point
of view is just that it's a
matter of there being some
things which are presented
to you in a certain way.
Terminology, though can get
pretty confusing. So as well as
talking about points of view,
I'll follow other people in
talking about perspectives. But
when I say perspective, I just
mean a point of view of
perspective on the world is a
point of view on the world,
another piece of terminology? Is
this term intentionality? Now
that's another term I'm going to
use very much, but you'll see it
used quite widely in the
textbooks. Intentionality is a
feature of you or some states or
some other kind of part or
aspect of you.
In virtue of which you have a
point of view, so we're talking
about intentionality. Were just
talking about that in which.
Sorry, say that again when
we're talking about
intentionality, we just
talking about that in virtue
of which you have a point of
view.
So this is of course as I say
about points of view about the
idea that there are some things
which are presented to you in a
certain way. For me those may be
presented in a different way, or
maybe that those things are not
presented to me at all.
Now, the notion of a point of
view is going to turn out to be
extremely puzzling, so it's
helpful to think at first about
a much simpler notion. The
notion of a viewpoint.
A viewpoint is just a location
in space and a direction.
I can occupy viewpoint and so
can you, but of course you don't
have to have a mind to occupy a
viewpoint. A rock can also
occupy viewpoint. Now this is
tricky because rocks,
unlike you and I, don't have
fronts and backs.  They
don't have faces, but we could
mark the front over otg with
some paint. Or we could have
assigned some functions of the
rock that gave it a front like
we do with cars and chairs, and
the rest these were all funded
objects. Once we come the rocker
front there is a sense in which
the rock is occupying a
viewpoint and you might have to
move the Rourke in order for you
to occupy the viewpoints that
previously the Rourke. Was
occupying. So nice to viewpoint
is an UN. Mysterious notion is
just a location and a direction,
but it seems to be related to
the idea of a point of view.
So we might ask.
Is having a point of view just a
matter of occupying a viewpoint?
The idea that something with the
mind might have a point of view
is going to turn out to be
extremely puzzling. That's what
we'll see later in the course.
By contrast, the idea that
something occupies the viewpoint
is not puzzling at all.
You can do that. I can do
that. Rocks can do that very
simple. So if we could say that
having a point of view was a
matter of occupying a viewpoint,
our lives of philosophers of
mind would be much simpler.
Just here I want to turn
this over to you.
As I'm going to explain a little
bit later, I hope that when
you're doing these lectures,
you're going to be observing
them with a friend, or perhaps
several friends that you can
communicate with, and I'm going
to be at various points asking
you questions and I'm going to
give you 90 seconds to think
about, and ideally, discuss
those questions. Come up with
some answers or some
complications. So here's the
first 90 seconds is having a
point of view just a matter of
occupying a viewpoint 90
seconds? Go.
So one of the things I'm really
missing about live lectures is
the opportunity just to hear
what a few people are thinking
on these questions. I hope that
you're going to have some
questions. Some thoughts for the
live online session about this.
Question is, is having a point
of view just a matter of
occupying a viewpoint? I think
we can see quite clearly that
the answer is no. By thinking
about these basic features of
a point of view.
First of all, what's one of
the things that's basic to a
point of view?
Is that?
It involves things being
presented to you in a certain
way. What looks hard to you
might look soft to me. What
looks like a mendacious
incompetent politician might
look like a great leader to you.
If having a point of view was
just a matter of occupying a
viewpoint that would make no
sense at all. After all,
viewpoints just a location, Anna
direction. There's no room in
the notion of a viewpoint for
the possibility that some things
might appear. One way to use
soft, another way to me, hard.
So the fact that points having
points of view involves things
being presented to you in a
certain way already rules out
the idea that we can think of
having a point of view is just a
matter of occupying a viewpoint.
But there's something else to
understand. Your point of view.
I may need to identify things
which do not exist. Perhaps you
mistakenly read the lost memory
of skin as a biography. So from
your point of view, the kid is a
person. You might try to go
looking for him. You might try
to find him. You might have some
questions which are left
unresolved by that novel.
If I thought that having a point
of view was just a matter of
occupying a viewpoint, this
would make no sense whatsoever.
The kid is a fictional character
to fit the kid does not exist.
There is no sense at all in
which you can go looking for
this person, not a sensible
thing to do. If I was just
thinking in terms of viewpoints,
matter of a location, and a
direction, I don't think I would
be able to make sense of the
idea that you have a point of
view. From which the kid is a
real person. The reason why you
are searching under those
bridges, going through the
streets is because from your
point of view, the kid is a
historical character, not a
fictional one. The notion of a
viewpoint cannot in anyway
encompass things that do not
exist, so it seems very clear
having a POV cannot just be a
matter of occupying a viewpoint.
It would make our lives much
simpler if it could.
But it looks like that's
impossible.
So this course mind and reality
is of course about points of
view. Having a point of view is
a fundamental part of having a
mind like your mind or my mind
will be investigating a variety
of philosophical questions.
Which were all in one way or
another, questions about
points of view. So let me
start by telling you what
those questions are.